=============================
Customizing the Website Theme
=============================

.. contents:: :local:

Instructions for site admins
============================

To simplify front end design, there is now an app for configuring the front end
(appearance and navigation) of your site.  Behind the scenes, the app is
generating template overrides and CSS stylesheets based on your configuration.

The themes app can be accessed at https://[yoursite].learningu.org/themes/.  There are 3 steps:

* Select a theme (/themes/select/)

You can choose from a set of pre-defined layouts.  We have adapted the most
commonly used site designs and added two new ones geared towards simpler sites.
You may need to force-refresh after loading a new theme in order to retrieve
updated stylesheets.  If there is a problem loading one of the themes, please
contact us.

See also the list of `Available Themes <available_themes.rst>`_.

* Set up the theme (/themes/setup/)

You will be presented with a form for information needed by the theme to
display properly.  Most themes will require certain text fragments (e.g. page
title, group contact information) to be provided.  Some also have customizable
navigation links.

* Customize the theme (/themes/customize/)

This is an opportunity to differentiate your site from the others by altering
its appearance without affecting functionality.  You will see a multi-section
form.  Define a set of colors in the first section "Palette" and set color and
shape options in the subsequent sections.  You can load and save these
customizations. You may have to force refresh (Shift + refresh) the page to see
the updated color scheme.

Manual Theming
==============

You are not required to use the themes app; you may still manually edit
template overrides and upload media files to control the appearance of the
site.  (Please note that loading a theme will delete or overwrite your template
overrides, so you should keep copies if you are experimenting.)  The themes app
provides a simplified alternative and we hope that all of our sites will use it
as soon as their designs have been added to our repository as themes.

